I can't remember that there was particularly.
I remember when I first started to write, I was in New York and I was on the beach from
the ship and I needed money badly.
I went to see an editor and he gave me an assignment for a sports story and I've never
been a sports addict and it had to do with basketball and I didn't know basketball at
all.
But he had given me an assignment and I was going to get my $40, which is what they paid
in those days.
I was hard at work at it and the idea for Beyond the Sands came in flat-wise and I said
in effect go away, I'm busy.
And the idea came back again and I said well finally oh alright and I wrote it in about
three hours that's all.
Just to get it out of my way and then I finished the sports story which I sold eventually.
But I put that manuscript in the bottom drawer and I knew I had a very unusual story here
and I kept it like one of the family tools.
And in about three years I got hungry enough to say well I got to sell the family jewels
and I found my amazement I couldn't give the story away.
It was nearly ten years before anybody would look seriously at it.
But in the meantime where I submitted it, it made, well there were two occasions, once
an editor and once an agent.
They said bring your stuff around and let's have a look at it.
You know, I'd come around on Tuesday, I'd go in on Tuesday and the secretary would say
go on in there and you had a guy sitting there and he's crumbling with anger.
He's furious.
He says here take this step, once you push it off onto the floor I had to pick it up.
Take this stuff and get out of here.
I don't want to deal with anybody writing this story like Bianca's.
Get out of here.
Why?
What's the matter?
What do you say to that?
Never mind, I don't want to talk about it.
And you know I left very hurt and very puzzled and not knowing what was going on with these
people.
Anyway finally a friend of mine wrote to me from England that there was a literary contest
in England in a magazine called Argosy and the deadline was New Year's Eve.
Well I got his letter at Christmas Eve so I dug this thing out of the trunk and ran
it through the cup without changing anything and sent it off and it must have arrived within
a minute to the deadline.
And it won the contest and I beat Graham Greene and John Pudney and a number of famous people
and got the first check I'd ever seen for over a thousand dollars and got much glory
out of it.
And it too has been reprinted a great number of times.
But that's the backstory on that.
But where the idea came from I cannot really tell you.
Okay, I guess this is sort of an obvious observation but let me make it anyhow.
I would suppose that in your fiction you're much more concerned with mankind's psychological
future than is technological's future.
Yeah, I think they're intertwined but my interest in technology is intense and I keep up as much
as anybody can with new developments in science and technology.
But yes, it is a human quantum that's of greatest importance to me.
I'm fascinated by human beings as long as it's if I wasn't exactly one of them and kept
on investigating to find out what made them tick.
You're also optimistic about man's future, aren't you?
Yes, I have an ultimate faith.
I think things are going to get a lot worse before they get better.
But I have enough faith in the human animal to feel that after a hundred years and more
of this and watching and stepping and dressing alike that you'll crack out of it and spread
its wings again.
And this time in a much better way than ever before.
It's so stupid nations act in ways that would not be permitted in any well run kindergarten.
You know, squabbling and grabbing and punching each other and bullying and so on.
I mean you can see it in the microcosm in a kindergarten class.
And the nations are behaving exactly the same way.
And this time it looks like they're picking wipes all off.
They have that capability.
Still, as I say, I have faith in humanity at home.
Okay, Mr. Sturgeon, I don't have too many more.
Are you still doing okay?
Oh, yes.
Okay.
I just forever.
Hang on a second.
Yeah.
I got a perennial frog in my throat.
Okay, what else do you got?
Okay, what changes have you seen in science fiction since you began writing back in the
30s?
Oh, well I've seen a tremendous amount of change.
But one thing I think has largely to the impact of fantasy and science fiction magazine and
Anthony Boucher and that kind of thing has stayed with that magazine all along.
Where it led in people who had real literary abilities that they were afraid to show when
it was just back in the hammer and Russian hard healing of the pulp era.
People began to write things that they really felt.
They write it in a higher literary style.
That too can be called a pulp magazine.
But my goodness, Tony began including poetry in it and a great deal of erudition and philosophical
ideas and poetic notions and the kind of fantasy that preceded Tolkien.
And that was a huge influence on the field and it has now spread all through the field.
Some of the writing you find in science fiction is fine.
It's fine with any writing done anywhere in the whole world in any era.
Latter-day Navajo was just about on the top level of literature.
His last novel was a science fiction novel.
A lot of people don't realize that.
It's called Eta and it has to do with the world in which the Germans had won the First World War
and the things that happened to the world after that.
It was purely an alternate universe story.
The other thing that's happened, of course, is women.
There have always been women in science fiction.
As a matter of fact, somebody who started science fiction as we know it was a woman,
a lady who wrote Frankenstein as she was a teenager.
If I had a time machine, I would go back and talk to that lady.
She must have been something else.
Amazing woman. Amazing.
I think she was 19 when she wrote Frankenstein.
Mary Shelley.
But the women who have been into science fiction, one of the very best was Judy Merrill.
Back in the 40s, she wrote some of the...
Well, if you look in the Hall of Fame of Science Fiction, you'll find a Judy Merrill story in there
called That Only a Mother, which was not only...
It was not only a Judy Merrill story, but it was the first story she'd ever written,
the first sale she ever made.
She told her first story, and that was it.
This extraordinary story. Really powerful.
Then there are people, like I just mentioned, that wild seed, for example,
there's a lovely story, there's Ursula K. Le Guin, who has won a National Book Award.
There's Doris Baceric here, whose ideas are always so totally unexpected.
There's Elizabeth and then there's...
Oh, on and on and on.
There are women in science fiction, or just extraordinary.
Remember, Lady and DeToy said to me that up to now it's been...
The woman has to work twice as hard and be twice as good as a man
before she can get the same recognition.
Then she added, fortunately, that's not difficult, which is a great lie.
But I admire the women in science fiction so very much.
Somebody said recently that there are so many excellent women in science fiction
that at long last it's possible to say that they found a mediocre one.
And it has been true. They've had to be better than the men to get where they are.
One of the great revelations in science fiction, of course, you no problem know about it, was James Tiptree.
Yes.
Who turns out after having a shattering success to be a lady by the name of Alice Sheldon.
That was the greatest acknowledgement to a lot of people.
She kept her head under her wing for so long that all sorts of rumors started that she was a CIA man,
or that she was a collaboration between Jerry Portell and somebody else or something.
But no, sir, she's her own man. She's good. Oh, she's good.
That's Kate Wilhelm, a writer, beautiful, steady prose. Very, very good.
That's the name of Night's wife.
So I'm more pleased than almost anything else about science fiction
that has led the women in to such a total degree.
And they're good. Almost every single one of them really got something unique to bring to the field and to literature as a whole.
I'm fascinated by women. I love the way they think.
There is a difference. But I'm not talking just equality, because there is a difference between the way men think and the way women do.
And so I'm utterly fascinated by the way women think, which leads us back to the whole business of ESP and the qualities of the developing mind.
I think women have shown certain qualities way, way ahead of the rest of it.
Okay. Are you disappointed, though, that science fiction has sort of remained as a separate genre, that it's not recognized as combined with mainstream literature?
Well, in a way it is. If you look at mainstream literature these days, you'll find that science fiction is permeating it.
I have a feeling that the whole business of science fiction being in separate fields is shaped pretty much like the handle of a suitcase.
That is, in the mid-twenties, it began to come out of the main body of literature.
And it got stronger and thicker, and it's going right back in again where it came from.
But it's going to color everything it touches, and it already has.
I have just mentioned, for example, that Vladimir Nabokov's last novel.
There's people like Marquette who won the Pulitzer Prize last year for a fascinating book called The Century of Longinus.
There's people who are recognized as literatures like Kurt Vonnegut who has never written anything but science fiction.
Although he refused to have the word used on any of his books or contracts because he didn't want to be tainted by that particular ghetto,
Ray Bradbury came up out of the science fiction field in regard to his most foremost literature.
Yeah, science fiction is becoming the mainstream.
Really, look at all the pictures that came out last year, for example, last summer with a heavy emphasis on science fiction.
People are beginning to realize that this forefront thinking is predictive or precognitive thinking.
It's of some moment that a lot of people who would not recognize it in 1984 was the science fiction novel until very recently.
I mean, things the Amos once wrote that the reaction to the general public and the so-called serious critic to science fiction is,
hey, this is good, this can't be science fiction, or hey, this is science fiction, it can't be good.
And this is the ghetto that science fiction had to grow up in.
But if you can survive in a ghetto, you generally come out strong.
And I think that's the case with science fiction now.
But I stuck with it not because I couldn't write other kinds of things,
but probably because I love the field and the freedom that it gives me.
Okay, excellent. You've written before, I guess you still agree with this, that science fiction is wisdom.
Did I write that?
Yes.
Yeah, I think that's true.
I don't remember writing that, but I did.
Yes, I think it is.
And as I said, my trademark is the letter Q of the arrow through it, which is, ask the next question, and essentially that's how wisdom is acquired.
I think you were talking about the derivation of the word science, the Greek base of it.
That's true. Yeah, that's right.
Okay, I guess it's...
It wasn't wisdom, it was knowledge.
Okay.
Scientia means knowledge, yeah.
Wisdom is something that knowledge applies.
I think that defines wisdom pretty well.
It's interesting too that wisdom is something that...
And it pragmatically changes as the times change, that it's to say what is wise in one era is not wise in another.
It's wise now, for example, to ask the next question and the one that follows and the one that follows.
Time was when you could burn to the stake for that.
Okay, how much science fiction are you writing these days?
Well, not a heck of a lot at the moment.
I'm involved at the moment in a tremendous script, six sides of an LP for Cadman Records.
And I'm doing a novel called Winesburg, Ohio by Sherwood Anderson.
It's a magnificent book.
And I'm turning that into a script which will have a celebrity cast and original music and sound effects and so on.
My wife is also doing one for Cadman.
She has just completed the sound and the pure, the William Faulkner on six sides of an LP.
Hercules and Task because it's a beast of a book to write.
The chronology is so strange.
She's also done breakfast at Tiffany's.
And so we've been pretty involved in that kind of thing.
But I'm not a bandit in science fiction by any means.
Well, you're still doing book reviews, aren't you?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, that's neat.
It fills my house up with books that I don't have to pay for.
Is that why you do them?
That's one of the reasons.
But that's not the real reason.
I'm always interested in the trends of people thinking.
And when you do book reviews, you find things about these motivations.
Certain things settle like a network over all sorts of writers, establish ones and new ones, like a huge net.
For example, all of a sudden everybody's going to be writing stories about other worlds or other situations or other planets.
And then the next thing you know, there'll be a whole spontaneous outpouring of books that have to do with, well, in both literature and in the movies.
It's been the possessed child, for example.
And you see these trends coming through.
It's fascinating.
You don't know where they come from.
But all of a sudden everybody starts writing, or many, many people start writing a certain kind of fiction.
And they're not imitating each other.
There's a friend of mine who is a journalist in North Carolina.
And he sent me two stories asking what I thought of them.
And maybe I could help him place them.
And one of them was Tron, which was a Disney movie.
One very liked it, except that it was done in pinball machines instead of electronic games.
And the other one was F. Paul Wilson's The Keep, which had to do with the buried vampire during World War II.
And a lot of friction between an SS man and a regular German officer.
And these two stories were written, you know, with absolutely no notion that they were being done elsewhere by other writers.
It's an interesting phenomenon, but a book reviewer has a good look at that particular thing.
You said you have no idea why certain trends or things like that start, say the popularity of fantasy or horror today.
Well, part of it, as far as Hollywood is concerned, of course, that's purely imitative.
I mean, somebody comes along with the exorcist, and immediately you could, I saw part of one just last night.
Although I generally have vanished television from my life altogether.
Jane and I decided we would not go look at television anymore, period.
And for that we got what I can call an eight day week.
You have no idea how much extra time you've got if you never look at the tube.
You miss one or two really good things.
But my roommate here upstairs has a television going almost all the time.
And as I passed back and forth, I get a glimpse of this dream.
There was so a part of one last night that had to do with a possessed child and a priest coming to perform an exorcism and so on.
These things are purely imitative.
Then when you get some deep space stories that begin to look terribly similar to one another,
the air is full of Star Wars imitations of one sort or another.
I mean, there's Star Wars and then on television there's Galactica, which is about as derivative as you can get.
And so on.
Hollywood feels that if anything is successful, you immediately jump on the bandwagon and make as many more as the traffic will bear along the same general theme.
But soon or later they lose money on it and go on to something else.
But the truly original idea is a very great deal of difficulty in getting in through the television and the movies.
And with a little less trouble into the mainstream.
That's not like what's popular today, they'll tell you, you know.
Did you ever hear of a book called A Wrinkle in Time?
Yeah.
Well, Madeleine Lingle wrote that after having published one book as a young girl, which turned her from a writer into an author.
And then she wrote Wrinkle not because of science fiction or anything else, but just the stories you wanted to write.
And it was turned down 22 times. 22 publishers turned that down to the point where she and her husband, he was an actor and things were bad in the acting business.
They trade together what many of them had and open a crossroads store in Connecticut.
And about nine years later, somebody suggested that she submit Wrinkle again, then she became practically hysterical.
But the second time out it hit.
And as you know, it's a prize winning novel now with, it was just really up there in the Hall of Fame.
A great book.
But it wasn't like anything that was in the trend in those days.
Nobody could understand it.
Nobody would believe anybody would want to read it.
And it's a delightful, powerful book.
So it just goes with it.
You have to kind of run at the speed where the train is running before you can climb aboard.
To be totally original or to be running in the opposite direction.
Sometimes you can grab on, but not always.
Okay, back to yourself for just a few seconds here.
You're not the type of writer who plans out a book or a story well ahead of time, are you?
No, although I have done it that way.
Usually it's a little image that's to catch fire.
Like I mentioned with more than human, it came to, with the image of the old monk taking care of these starving children in the cave in the woods.
He wasn't a main character in that book.
And so the ones in my book weren't exactly that kind of thing either.
But it was just the image that took off from that.
And I suppose as you write all these other ideas cluster up more, Venus plus X was a way of getting off my chest.
A whole lot of feelings that I had about our civilization as a whole and the things that were pushing it around.
Particularly this business is sex differentiation.
I wanted to see what it would be like if we didn't have that in a culture.
And so I structured the whole novel around that.
But you'll see that the book is built with alternate storylines.
One is very contemporary.
The other one is in this strange country of the Ladone.
And they're double-stacks.
But it comes always.
Sometimes I do structure them, but mostly it comes from a flash of that short.
Also, it's very difficult for me to write at all.
Writing comes very hard to me indeed, including writing letters, which accounts for the size of my phone bill.
However, when one of those things hit me, I would write for 30 hours at a time and just fall over sideways.
Go off somewhere and convalesce.
And so I don't rewrite almost everything I've ever written just exactly the way it came out of the typewriter the first time.
So how the infrastructure appears and the spacing of smaller crises and all tying together into a large one at the end and so on.
I don't know where that comes from.
That just happens.
I consider myself very fortunate in that.
I would be a lot better off if I wrote more, but I don't.
My bibliography looks a lot longer than it really is because I've been reprinted so much, and I'm very lucky there.
Yeah, in that respect, the things that you've written, this is probably not a fair question to ask an author.
A lot of them really don't want to answer it.
But do you have any particular works of your own that you think are particularly good that you're proud of?
Certain stories, yeah.
The Silken Swift is a unicorn story, for example.
I'm very proud of it.
I love that story.
And I've just written a new story which will appear, or is appearing right now in Germany.
The deal there is that they get an original story and they hang on to it until six months after publication.
And then I'm free to sell it anywhere else and you'll probably read it.
And it seems to be a very simple story indeed.
It's called Seasoning.
It's about a guy who has a kind of a metaphysical experience.
And it's not anywhere near as simple a story as it seems to be.
But I'm very proud of that one.
You'll see it in due course.
But see, looking for others of what I would call my favorite story, I do like that unicorn story.
I like the way it's written.
It's a very passionate story and it has something I consider very important to say.
There again I'd be combating the assumption that a woman who is not a virgin is not as good a woman as she might be.
Yeah, I remember that story.
That was the basic statement of the story.
It's wonderful that it came out in case that way because I love the way that story is written.
Okay, listen.
Oh, then of course there's The Dreaming Jewels, which was great fun to write.
And another novel I wrote called Cosmic Rates.
But you don't see around very much anymore.
It'll be reissued sometime soon.
What I like about that story is that it has in it, I don't know, 18 or 20 different story lines.
And the way they're all pulled together at the end absolutely amazes me.
It really genuinely amazes me how I could get that many completely disparate story ideas
and pull them all together into the same place.
I read that thing and said, gosh, how did he do that?
And then I realized that he who did it was me.
Wasn't The Dreaming Jewels your first novel?
Yeah, and it was a great deal.
I did not know about writing novels at that time, so it is flawed as a novel.
But it has some good writing in it.
Yeah, okay.
I've often heard this quoted and I wondered what the input is, sort of the occasion for it was.
And that is Sturgeon's Law.
Oh, that came about sometime in the 50s.
And I can't remember exactly where it was, but it was at a science fiction convention.
And there was somebody who came to, you know, some people like to make an impact
by getting a whole bunch of people who like a particular thing
and coming up and tearing it all to pieces.
And he'd done his homework.
He got a copy of every magazine that was in the hotel newsstand and every book.
And he spent all night leafing through them.
And he had a whole forearm full of book and magazines with bookmarks in them.
And he convulsed the audience there for about 40 minutes with examples of some of the worst syntax,
some of the dumbest dialogues, some of the most improbable science and so on.
Which in those days, the science fiction was a whole lot of it.
And then he said to me right on stage,
well you're not conceived that this science fiction is 90% crap.
And I answered, I had this rush of brains with the head.
I answered him by saying, yes, that's only because 90% of everything is crap.
Which quite took the wind out of his self.
Then I was able to go on and develop the idea, which is only true,
that science fiction has been in the ghetto for so long that people say,
oh this is like Kingsley Amies said, this is science fiction, it can't be good.
And it was unique as a literary genre in that it was not permitted its spectrum of poor and good.
That is to say in the mystery field everybody could distinguish between the same Mickey Spelane
and somebody like Nioh Marsh or Darcy L. Sayers.
There's a spectrum of excellence there, so these things are better than others.
Same thing in the westerns, Hopalong Cassidy is not the same thing as Best Rewrits again.
But science fiction, it was all buck rogers, zap guns, and space in the year 2200.
And nobody would have twice on the fact to find that there was good science fiction and bad science fiction.
And excellent and poor writing.
And that caused my response.
But since then that's been caused by surgeons' law that 90% of this is bad because 90% of everything is bad.
The president company accepted of course.
Okay.
How do you retain your optimism? Why hasn't the world beaten you down?
Well I've had my depressive periods, but usually they've been personal
and not species if you see what I mean.
I share the awe of humanity that Shakespeare did when he wrote that beautiful passage.
What a piece of work is a man, how noble in reason.
You remember that? How God-like in his aspect.
And I've always had that feeling about humanity.
It's an extraordinary development in the universe.
Extraordinary.
And it's our potential really that excites and fuels me the most.
I think that in being created we were given the ability to solve all our problems.
That doesn't mean to say we were given the solutions to all our problems.
I didn't say that.
But if you have a little girl who was dying of leukemia at the age of five, that seems like a terrible injustice.
But the ability to solve that problem is with us.
Even the fact that her death can contribute to it.
We're the one species that is given this ability all the way through to solve our own problems.
And if we don't take advantage of that ability of course, we're doomed.
But the point is that we do have that ability.
I marvel at that. Absolutely marvel at that.
So this is really the basis of my love for humanity as a whole.
Do you have any plans for any future science fiction?
Oh yeah. Yeah.
I've got a number of things going.
I have an outlining book called Star Anguish.
Which has to do with the...
I'm not quite sure of the framework that it will have.
At first I was thinking of the kind of government and the development of a moral and ethical posture for a spaceship on a 20,000 year voyage.
And the watch through generations developed.
And the kind of religions and morality and so on that would come and go during that kind of history.
But I'm beginning to have two thoughts about that.
But I think I'll take that name, Spame, and use it in some other framework.
But I know it's tight. Let's go start anguish.
Okay, good. Listen, this is taking a lot of your time Mr. Surgeon.
Maybe we better stop right about here.
Yeah, I've got to get back to the script.
I'm going to work all tonight and all tomorrow.
Listen, maybe I'll get to meet you this summer.
I've applied for the James Gunn Institute in Kansas this summer.
I sure hope that makes. Do you have any idea if it will?
I certainly hope so, Carol. And as far as I know, it is going forward.
I'm going to Wichita on Thursday and we'll probably learn more about it then.
Okay, yeah, I certainly hope it does work.
Well, listen Mr. Surgeon, what we'll do is to edit these tapes and I'm sure we'll get a couple of weeks worth of shows out of them.
Because each show is only about five minutes.
And so we'll probably get at least two weeks of shows out of this.
So we will send you the tapes when it's edited.
Right, that's fine. And if you want to wait until you have them all and spend a seven to five minute segment.
Yeah, oh yeah, we'll do that.
In fact, if they will probably, I'll probably just bring them to you this summer unless we mail them earlier.
If I see you there at Lawrence.
That'll be great. And you do have my mailing address here.
Yeah, let's see. This is the San Diego address.
Yeah, three, five, or five out of this to drive.
That's the one.
Mr. Surgeon, we sure appreciate the time you've given us.
Well, it's been a pleasure to talk to you and I like things like this because, you know, nobody knows what he believes until he tells somebody else.
Yeah, no, I've been very impressed with your work and it's an honor to talk to you and I hope to meet you soon.
Well, I'm looking forward to it too, Carol.
Okay, then take care, Mr. Surgeon.
Bye.